CHAPTER ONE

Virginia Military Institute. The Flag Raising. Growing War Spirit.


The growing discontent and excitement in 1860 and the early part of
1861 will ever be remembered by those who passed through that period.
At and before this time I, then in my teens, was a cadet at the
Virginia Military Institute located at Lexington, Virginia.

For some years prior to this, the questions of political difference
between the sections of the United States designated as North and South
had been discussed in Congress and on the hustings with increasing
acrimony and divergence. The two great political parties, Democrat
and Whig, had long been contestants for political supremacy, but in
1860 the Republican party, theretofore greatly inferior in numbers and
strength to either of the others, elected Abraham Lincoln sixteenth
President of the United States. This was attributed to a division in
the Democratic party and the nomination of candidates by each of its
two factions. This triumph of the Republican party increased anxiety
and apprehension in the people of the South as to their institutions
and rights.

Then followed the assembling of the National Congress on the first
Monday in December; the secession of South Carolina, December 20th,
1860; of Alabama, January 11th, 1861; of Georgia, January 19th;
Louisiana, January 26th; Texas, February 1st; the evacuation of Fort
Sumpter by the Federals, April 14th; the call by Lincoln for troops to
coerce the seceded States April 15th; the secession of Virginia, April
17th; of Arkansas, May 6th; of North Carolina, May 20th; of Tennessee,
June 24th; and by acts of the Provisional Congress Missouri was
admitted as a member of the Confederate States of America, August 20th;
and Kentucky on December 10th,--and of these States the new nation was
organized.

Leaders in the field and not on the forum were now being considered and
looked to. Sons of the South who had been trained at West Point and a
long list of trained soldiers from the Virginia Military Institute, as
well as its professors, educated and trained in the science of war,
were justly of first consideration. Many of these and many laymen,
as well as many members of the then corps of cadets, won enviable
distinction in the four ensuing years. The V. M. I., the West Point of
the South, now disclosed its inestimable worth to the new nation born
at Montgomery, February 18th, 1861. It may be of interest to relate
here an incident which disclosed in advance a military chieftain
of whom but little was known until the opportunity came for him to
discover his merit. Men before this period who had filled mediocre
places, began to burst forth in new light as opportunity came. An
incident of one, then a quiet V. M. I. professor, now known to history
and the world, is worth preserving. It occurred in March, 1861, at
Lexington.

The secession of Virginia had not then occurred, but the step was being
hotly contested on the hustings between opposing parties. The corps of
cadets was almost unanimous for, and the county of Rockbridge and the
town of Lexington at the time overwhelmingly against, secession.

Lexington was the home of honest John Letcher, then Governor of the
State, whose potent influence was understood to have thus molded public
sentiment. The secessionists were enthusiastic and intolerant, the
unionists sedate and determined. The war spirit had grown rapidly and
had spread to all classes. Members of the corps were almost daily
hoisting on barracks secession flags which were promptly taken down
by order of the Institute authorities, such evidences of sentiment
thus displayed on a State Institution not being permissible while the
State was yet a member of the Union. At this time a fine volunteer
company composed of young men of Lexington and vicinity, with Capt.
Sam Letcher, brother of the Governor, at its head, was being regularly
drilled on Saturdays of each week.

The war spirit had now grown so intense that but a spark was needed to
set its smouldering fires into a consuming flame. To emphasize their
sentiments, the opposing parties without concert or understanding,
conceived the plan of raising flags; one the stars and bars, the other
the stars and stripes. The following Saturday was chosen as the day.
Due advertisement had been given by both parties. This brought large
numbers of people to town, most of whom came provided with such arms
as the husbandman of that day had. The number of unionists was more
than four times greater than the number of secessionists. The latter
soon ran up their flag in the court house yard, addresses followed and
the small crowd, including the corps of cadets, was about to disperse
to their homes, and the corps to barracks, when the unionists began
raising their flag pole some distance up and in the middle of Main
street. From some defect the pole broke and fell, at which the corps
vociferously gave vent to expressions of joy, and later returned to
barracks more than half a mile away, leaving, however, some three or
four of its number behind.

On reaching barracks dinner roll call and the march to and from dinner
followed. As ranks were broken on our return from dinner, one of our
number who had remained uptown came in breathless haste and announced
that House Mountain men had fallen on some of the cadets uptown and
killed them. House Mountain is situate some ten or a dozen miles from
Lexington, and at and in the vicinity of its base were homes of a good
class of people. They were understood at that time to be extremely
pro-Union. This information thus given was the needed match to set in
flame the pent-up feeling for war. Without a word every member of the
corps rushed to his room, seized his musket, cartridge box, bayonet
and scabbard and accoutered himself as he ran down the stoops to
the front of barracks, thence down the near way to the foot of Main
street near the Letcher residence. Colonel (afterwards General) Smith,
superintendent and ranking officer of the Institute, intercepted and
tried to turn us back, but his efforts were in vain. On we sped until
we reached Main street. Here Cadet Captain Galloway called out, "Form
battalion." This we proceeded to do. All had loaded their muskets and
fixed bayonets as they proceeded hither.

While battalion was forming Major John McCausland (then a
sub-professor and afterwards a brilliant Confederate brigadier general)
appeared in front of the battalion and said, "Young men, form and I
will lead you up." Col. Smith had now arrived and began to urge our
return to barracks. R. McCulloch, of the corps, called to McCausland to
lead us on. He replied that his superior officer (Colonel Smith) was in
command. Meanwhile the unionists who had realized the situation were
but a short distance up the street, preparing for the shock of battle
which seemed so imminent. The entreaties to return to barracks and the
formation into battalion went on. There stood one hundred and eighty
manly youths, armed and equipped and eager for the fray, awaiting the
command forward. They were of the very flower of the South. A little
later on many of them won marked distinction, boys as they were in
armies the soldiers of which for gallantry and endurance have never
been excelled in the history of the world.

At this time, Mr. Massey who had won our confidence in his remarks
at the flag raising earlier in the day and Maj. R. E. Colston, a
professor in the V. M. I. and afterwards a gallant Confederate
brigadier-general, galloped up and joined in the appeal for our return
to barracks. Meanwhile a greater than any arrived, tall, sinewy,
well-formed, a slight stoop in the shoulders, large feet and hands,
retreating forehead, blue-grey eyes, straight nose, strong mouth and
chin held well to the front, in measured gait, Major Thomas Jonathan
Jackson walked up and down before the battalion which he viewed
closely, then looked at the surroundings and position of the opposing
forces. He uttered no word, but his movements grew more animated each
moment, his stature straightened and grew taller and bigger, and his
merit was apparent to all and made him the central figure. Still the
formation of battalion went on. A leader who would take command was
only needed, while but two or three hundred yards up the street the
volunteer company of a hundred young men well-officered, armed and
equipped were drawn up across the street in battle array, supported
by five times their number of the citizens of the town and county,
armed with shotguns, rifles and pistols. This warlike scene which had
been gathering like a storm cloud during the morning had alarmed the
peace-loving citizens and hence an impromptu delegation came forth to
intercede for peace and prevent a bloody tragedy which seemed about to
occur. These intercessions prevailed, and the corps broke ranks and
returned to barracks, discharging their loaded guns as they went.

As soon as we reached barracks, we were summoned by the familiar drum
beat to Colonel Smith's section room where we found Colonels Smith
and Preston and Mr. Massey on, and Major Jackson near to, but off the
rostrum. Colonel Smith proceeded at once to excoriate the corps for its
insubordinate conduct. Preston, then Massey, responded pacifically
to our call. Last but not least, Major Jackson was called. I remember
the scene as if enacted but yesterday. True soldier as he was, Jackson
hesitated until Colonel Smith, his superior in rank, asked him to
speak. At once he mounted the rostrum and faced his audience. His erect
figure, flashing eye, energetic expression, short, quick and to the
point, disclosed to the commonest mind a leader of merit. He said,
"Military men make short speeches, and as for myself I am no hand at
speaking anyhow. The time for war has not yet come, but it will come
and that soon, and when it does come my advice is to draw the sword and
throw away the scabbard." The personality of the speaker, the force
of these simple words thus uttered, elicited a response of approval
I never heard surpassed, except by the Confederate yell often heard
on the battlefield a little later on. This simple speech and manner
of Jackson established in the minds of his audience the belief that
he was a leader upon whose loyalty and courage we could rely. How
strange it was that this quiet professor who had performed his every
duty, monotonous in its regularity, should with a bound leap into
view and establish in the minds of his audience that he possessed the
qualifications of a brilliant and dashing leader. This was a revelation
to his friends and acquaintances, and the estimate of him then formed
was shown to be correct by after developments.

It was at the V. M. I. that I first came to know its superintendent and
professors, including Jackson. Of the corps of cadets there were young
men and boys, representing every state of the South and some of the
States of the North. The corps was considered to be one of the finest
the institution had ever had. Jackson, ever faithful to duty, now
manifested great interest in the political conditions of the country
and what they portended. He was instructor in artillery tactics,
his favorite arm of the service. He now pushed work, giving great
attention to the practical part. Drilling, limbering and unlimbering,
target practice and the work incident thereto were very trying to boys
in their teens in the hot spring sun, but neither heat nor cold had any
terrors for Jackson when duty or the accomplishment of a purpose were
involved.




[Illustration]




CHAPTER TWO

Corps of Cadets ordered to Richmond. March to Staunton, thence by rail
to Richmond. Wreck in Blue Ridge Tunnel. Speech of Governor at Richmond.


Some of the States had passed ordinances of secession and others were
following in rapid succession and war between the States was no longer
problematical, but a fact. Virginia hesitated, but soon cast her lot
with her sister States of the South and became a part of the new
nation. Preparation for war was now pushed forward with great energy.
Our corps under command of the State had previously been ordered to
Richmond, and its members had been assigned to drill and organize for
service the raw volunteers then hurrying thither.

On our departure from the V. M. I. we marched to Staunton, about
thirty-six miles distant, thence by rail to Richmond. All were
delighted and filled with pride on that beautiful spring morning when
the corps in fine array with martial tread marched from the front of
barracks, down by the mess hall to the pike, thence on toward Staunton.
Colonels Smith and Gilliam and Major Jackson were in charge. Baggage
and artillery followed. The bridge across North River was passed and as
we ascended the slope on the other side we took a last lingering look
at the fading outlines of barracks, so dear to us. There our laudable
boyish ambitions had been aroused, our hopes kindled and our mental and
physical manhood developed. There each was independent of the others,
yet all were a band of brothers. Each had learned to obey, and hence
knew how to command. The march continued and barracks was soon out
of sight. About ten miles out, knapsacks became too burdensome, and a
farmer's wagon was impressed for service. This relieved us greatly.

Staunton was reached about 10 o'clock on the night of the day we set
forth. The corps was fed and lodged for the night in the hotels.
Footsore and weary we slept well and arose at early reveille, chipper
and bright and ready for the coming duties of the day. One of the
first of which was after breakfast to load on flat cars our battery of
four pieces of artillery and our equipment. This was new to us and was
hard work. This done, we found we would have two or three hours at our
disposal before leaving. Many matrons and damsels, as well as men and
boys, had already come to the station to give cheer and encouragement
to those who were going forth to do battle for their cause. The neat
fitting uniforms of the cadets, to say nothing of their good looks
and personal merit, for they were a magnificent body of youths, were
always pleasing. A little later the crowd of ladies, men, boys and
girls with waving handkerchiefs, cheers and huzzas bade us good-bye,
and on our way to Richmond we sped.

All went well, until we reached the Blue Ridge tunnel on the old
Central, now Chesapeake and Ohio, railroad. Here an exciting and
somewhat perilous catastrophe occurred. The train consisted of
passenger cars for the officers and corps and flat cars for the battery
and baggage. It was special, and hence had no schedule time. When well
in the tunnel, which is nearly a mile long, our engine was derailed.
The smoke from it filled the cars and the narrow space around them. We
could not go forward, for the engine and force engaged blocked the way;
nor could we go back, as we would be in danger of being left, as the
engine might be ready for duty any minute and would at once pull out.
To add to our peril another train from the direction whence we came
was about due as per schedule time, and was liable to collide with
ours, in which event results could but be imagined. Thus we were held
veritable prisoners for nearly two hours, imperiled by the dangers of
an oncoming train and the suffocating smoke from our own engine,--our
first lesson in the privations and hardships of war. In all this the
boys were bright and cheerful. Many witty and some sage remarks were
made. Soon, however, we were on our way. Nothing of interest transpired
on the rest of our journey, except greetings given us at the stations
by the already aroused people who assembled to cheer us on, and the
timid requests of the fair maidens for souvenir buttons from our
uniforms. Such requests could not be refused. So far was it carried
that some of our uniforms were quite disfigured before we reached our
destination.

Late in the afternoon Richmond loomed up to view. This was another new
sight, for most of us were from rural districts and had never seen a
city. From the station we marched to the front of the Capitol building
in Capitol Square. Here the corps was reviewed by his excellency the
Governor who made a little talk and the compliments paid us were
pleasing to boys as we were. He said among other things that war was
upon us and much depended upon our work in preparing an army for the
field. Then amid the waving of handkerchiefs by the dames and maidens
and the huzzas of the men and boys, a large number of whom had gathered
to see and greet us, we marched to what was then known as the new fair
grounds about two miles west of the city. Here we were quartered in the
Exhibition and other buildings. The grounds were beautiful and well
suited for a camp of instruction.

Companies and regiments began at once to arrive, undrilled and
undisciplined, raw and without arms, except in instances where the
individual had given play to his own imagination as to what would be
useful in battle, and pursuant thereto had brought the squirrel rifle,
the shotgun, the butcher's knife and the pistol, some of the latter
of the old pepper box type. A few thought the savage, the dare-devil
mien the true indice of the soldier, hence the red hunting shirt,
the coon skin cap, the unkempt hair and beard were popular insignia.
How ludicrous was it all in the light of after experience! Yet these
manifestations were not to be condemned. It is a chapter in their
history that ought to give pride to their sons and daughters, because
these were the promptings of purest patriotism.

We began early to grapple with the fact that the South was without
arms with which to meet a well armed, equipped and powerful foe.
These disadvantages to be contended with by the new nation were very
great, hence the organization of an army and its equipment as best
might be was rushed with great vigor. Enlistment was rapid and troops
now entering the camp were anxious to be drilled and instructed. The
pulpit, the bench, the bar, the farm, the anvil, the shop and every
other calling was represented, ready and willing to take any position
from captaincy to private, the latter generally preferred, because
of the general feeling of unpreparedness for the responsibilities
of office and command, hence there was no unseemly scramble in this
respect.

At first the camp was intended for Virginia troops only, but it was
soon made the rendezvous of troops of other States as well. This
increased the numbers so much that not only the new but the old fair
ground was utilized and filled. All added to the excitement, and war
and preparation therefore were the absorbing themes of the old and
the young, male and female. No male, physically and mentally able to
do service, would stay out. Boys of tender years enlisted with the
approval of fathers and mothers, and in some instances were even urged
to do so. No critical or even cursory examination was applied to the
volunteer. Meanwhile the drill, the discipline and the organization
went on in a most satisfactory way. The efficient work of the corps of
cadets which deserves much praise was soon apparent. It is just to say
that the work had been done mainly under the command of our commandant,
Col. Wm. Gilliam, Colonel Smith having returned to the Institute and
Major Jackson having been commissioned a colonel and ordered to report
to Gen. Joseph E. Johnston at Harpers Ferry.
